add wlm feature overview (#8632)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _tuning-your-cluster/availability-and-recovery/workload-management/wlm-feature-overview.md

---
layout: default
title: Workload management
nav_order: 70
has_children: true
parent: Availability and recovery
---

# Workload management

> Workload management allows users to group and search network traffic, isolating system resources to prevent the overuse of network resources by specific requests. It offers the following benefits:

Author: This wording seems wrong, WLM does not group and search the network traffic rather provide support for multitenancy for search traffic

Author: The previous description was more accurate and informative
```
Workload management allows users to group search traffic and isolate system resources, preventing resource hogging by specific requests. This ensures fair resource allocation, even for short-lived, low-intensity queries.
This feature offers tenant-level admission control and reactive query management. It can identify and cancel resource-intensive queries when configured thresholds are exceeded, ensuring fair resource allocation.
This feature provides tenant-level isolation within the cluster for search workloads, operating at a node level.
```

> Workload management allows users to group and search network traffic, isolating system resources to prevent the overuse of network resources by specific requests. It offers the following benefits:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Workload management allows users to group search traffic and isolate system resources, preventing the overuse of network resources by specific requests. It offers the following benefits:
```

Reviewer: @kaushalmahi12: How about this? The other two sentences from the original request are in the bulleted list below.

Author: it seems fine, we just need to replace the `network` with `system` . since the network is just one part of system resources.

- Tenant-level isolation within the cluster for search workloads, operating at a node level.

## Query groups

System administrators can dynamically manage query groups using the Workload management APIs. These query groups can be used to make search requests with resource limits.

The following example adds a query group with the named `analytics`:

```json
PUT _wlm/query_group
{
  “name”: “analytics”,
  “resiliency_mode”: “enforced”,
  “resource_limits”: {
    “cpu”: 0.4,
    “memory”: 0.2
  }
}
```

## Workload management settings

There are following settings can be used to customize workload management using the `_cluster/settings` API:

| **Setting name**  | **Description**  |

| :--- | :--- |
| `wlm.query_group.duress_streak` | Determines the node duress threshold. Once the threshold is reached, the node is marked as `in duress`. |
| `wlm.query_group.enforcement_interval`  | Defines the monitoring interval. |
| `wlm.query_group.mode`  | Defines the [operating mode](#operating-modes). |
| `wlm.query_group.node.memory_rejection_threshold` | Defines the query group level `memory` threshold. When the threshold is reached, the request is rejected. |

> | `wlm.query_group.node.cpu_rejection_threshold` | Defines query group level `cpu` threshold.  When the threshold is reached, the request is rejected. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `wlm.query_group.node.cpu_rejection_threshold` | Defines query group level `cpu` threshold. When the threshold is reached, the request is rejected. |
```

---
layout: default
title: Workload management
nav_order: 70
has_children: true
parent: Availability and recovery
---

Introduced 2.18
{: .label .label-purple }

# Workload management

Workload management allows users to group search traffic and isolate network resources, preventing the overuse of network resources by specific requests. It offers the following benefits:

- Tenant-level admission control and reactive query management. When resource usage exceeds configured limits, it automatically identifies and cancels demanding queries, ensuring fair resource distribution.

- Tenant-level isolation within the cluster for search workloads, operating at a node level.

## Installing workload management

To install workload management, use the following command: 

```json
./bin/opensearch-plugin install workload-management
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

## Permissions

Only users with administator-level permissions can use workload management. 

## Query groups

> A _query group_ is a logical group of tasks with defined resource limits. System administrators can dynamically manage query groups using the Workload management APIs. These query groups can be used to make search requests with resource limits. 

Author: > Workload management APIs

It should be workload management REST APIs.

Reviewer: When referring to API names, we always capitalize the first letter. See the API style guide, https://github.com/opensearch-project/documentation-website/blob/main/API_STYLE_GUIDE.md#api-name

  “resiliency_mode”: “enforced”,
  “resource_limits”: {
    “cpu”: 0.4,
    “memory”: 0.2
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

When creating a query group, make sure that the sum of the resource limits for a single resource, such as `cpu` or `memory`, does not exceed `1`.

### Example response

OpenSearch responds with the set resource limits and the `_id` for the query group:

```json
{
  "_id":"preXpc67RbKKeCyka72_Gw",
  "name":"analytics",
  "resiliency_mode":"enforced",
  "resource_limits":{
    "cpu":0.4,
    "memory":0.2
  },
  "updated_at":1726270184642
}
```

## Using `queryGroupID`

You can associate a query request with a `queryGroupID` to manage and allocate resources within the limits defined by the query group. By utilizing this ID, requests are routed and tracked under the query group, ensuring resource quotas and task limits are maintained.

The following example query uses the `queryGroupId` to ensure that the query stays under that query group's resource limits:

```json
{
  "_id":"preXpc67RbKKeCyka72_Gw",
  "name":"analytics",
  "resiliency_mode":"enforced",
  "resource_limits":{
    "cpu":0.4,
    "memory":0.2
  },
  "updated_at":1726270184642
}
```

> {% include copy-curl.html %}

Author: The correct way to use the queryGroupId to make search request is to assign `queryGroupId` header along with a search request. for example

```
curl -XGET "http://localhost:9200/*/_search" -H 'queryGroupId: preXpc67RbKKeCyka72_Gw'
```

Reviewer: Copy and paste error here. Fixing now.

```json
GET _wlm/stats
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

### Example response 

```json
{
  “_nodes”: {
    “total”: 1,
    “successful”: 1,
    “failed”: 0
  },
  “cluster_name”: “XXXXXXYYYYYYYY”,
  “A3L9EfBIQf2anrrUhh_goA”: {
    “query_groups”: {
      “16YGxFlPRdqIO7K4EACJlw”: {
        “total_completions”: 33570,
        “total_rejections”: 0,
        “total_cancellations”: 0,
        “cpu”: {
          “current_usage”: 0.03319935314357281,
          “cancellations”: 0,
          “rejections”: 0
        },
        “memory”: {
          “current_usage”: 0.002306486276211217,
          “cancellations”: 0,
          “rejections”: 0
        }
      },
      “DEFAULT_QUERY_GROUP”: {
        “total_completions”: 42572,
        “total_rejections”: 0,
        “total_cancellations”: 0,
        “cpu”: {
          “current_usage”: 0,
          “cancellations”: 0,
          “rejections”: 0
        },
        “memory”: {
          “current_usage”: 0,
          “cancellations”: 0,
          “rejections”: 0
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

### Response body fields 

| Field name | Description |

> |:----|:--- | 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| :--- | :--- | 
```

> | `total_completions`   | The total number of request completions in this `query_group` at the given node. This includes all shard-level and coordinator-level requests. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `total_completions`  |  The total number of request completions in this `query_group` at the given node. This includes all shard-level and coordinator-level requests. |
```

---
layout: default
title: Workload management
nav_order: 70
has_children: true
parent: Availability and recovery
---

Introduced 2.18
{: .label .label-purple }

# Workload management

> Workload management allows users to group search traffic and isolate network resources, preventing the overuse of network resources by specific requests. It offers the following benefits:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Workload management allows you to group search traffic and isolate network resources, preventing the overuse of network resources by specific requests. It offers the following benefits:
```

- Tenant-level admission control and reactive query management. When resource usage exceeds configured limits, it automatically identifies and cancels demanding queries, ensuring fair resource distribution.

> - Tenant-level isolation within the cluster for search workloads, operating at a node level.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Tenant-level isolation within the cluster for search workloads, operating at the node level.
```

- **Monitor_only mode** (Default): Workload management will monitor tasks but it will not cancel/reject any queries.

### Example request

The following example adds a query group with the named `analytics`:

```json
PUT _wlm/query_group
{
  “name”: “analytics”,
  “resiliency_mode”: “enforced”,
  “resource_limits”: {
    “cpu”: 0.4,
    “memory”: 0.2
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

When creating a query group, make sure that the sum of the resource limits for a single resource, such as `cpu` or `memory`, does not exceed `1`.

### Example response

OpenSearch responds with the set resource limits and the `_id` for the query group:

```json
{
  "_id":"preXpc67RbKKeCyka72_Gw",
  "name":"analytics",
  "resiliency_mode":"enforced",
  "resource_limits":{
    "cpu":0.4,
    "memory":0.2
  },
  "updated_at":1726270184642
}
```

## Using `queryGroupID`

You can associate a query request with a `queryGroupID` to manage and allocate resources within the limits defined by the query group. By utilizing this ID, requests are routed and tracked under the query group, ensuring resource quotas and task limits are maintained.

> 

Reviewer: Tracked under as in associated with query group and not using other resources within the cluster.

The following example query uses the `queryGroupId` to ensure that the query stays under that query group's resource limits:

```json
GET testindex/_search
Host: localhost:9200
Content-Type: application/json
queryGroupId: preXpc67RbKKeCyka72_Gw
{
  "query": {
    "match": {
      "field_name": "value"
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

## Workload management settings

The are following settings can be used to customize workload management using the `_cluster/settings` API:

| **Setting name**  | **Description**  |
| :--- | :--- |
| `wlm.query_group.duress_streak` | Determines the node duress threshold. Once the threshold is reached, the node is marked as `in duress`. |
| `wlm.query_group.enforcement_interval`  | Defines the monitoring interval. |
| `wlm.query_group.mode`  | Defines the [operating mode](#operating-modes). |
| `wlm.query_group.node.memory_rejection_threshold` | Defines the query group level `memory` threshold. When the threshold is reached, the request is rejected. |
| `wlm.query_group.node.cpu_rejection_threshold` | Defines query group level `cpu` threshold. When the threshold is reached, the request is rejected. |

> | `wlm.query_group.node.memory_cancellation_threshold` | Controls whether the node is considered in duress when the `cpu` threshold is reached and the effective request cancellation threshold based on `memory` usage. |

Reviewer: @natebower: Does this work?

> | `wlm.query_group.node.memory_cancellation_threshold` | Controls whether the node is considered in duress when the `cpu` threshold is reached and the effective request cancellation threshold based on `memory` usage. |

Reviewer 2: @Naarcha-AWS Yes 👍

| `wlm.query_group.node.cpu_cancellation_threshold`    | Controls whether the node is considered in duress when the `cpu` threshold is reached and the effective request cancellation threshold on `cpu` usage. |

When setting rejection and cancellation settings thresholds, remember that the rejection threshold for a resource should always be less than the cancellation threshold. 

### Operating modes

The following operating modes determine the operating-level for the query group:

- **Disabled mode**: Workload management is disabled.

- **Enabled mode**: Workload management is enabled and will cause cancellations and rejection once the query group’s configured thresholds are reached.

- **Monitor_only mode** (Default): Workload management will monitor tasks but it will not cancel/reject any queries.

> 

Reviewer 2: The content I deleted already appears on lines 37-45.

> ## Workload management stats API

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Workload Management Stats API
```

> The Workload management stats API returns workload management metrics for a query group, using the following method:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Workload Management Stats API returns workload management metrics for a query group, using the following method:
```

```json
GET _wlm/stats
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

### Example response 

```json
{
  “_nodes”: {
    “total”: 1,
    “successful”: 1,
    “failed”: 0
  },
  “cluster_name”: “XXXXXXYYYYYYYY”,
  “A3L9EfBIQf2anrrUhh_goA”: {
    “query_groups”: {
      “16YGxFlPRdqIO7K4EACJlw”: {
        “total_completions”: 33570,
        “total_rejections”: 0,
        “total_cancellations”: 0,
        “cpu”: {
          “current_usage”: 0.03319935314357281,
          “cancellations”: 0,
          “rejections”: 0
        },
        “memory”: {
          “current_usage”: 0.002306486276211217,
          “cancellations”: 0,
          “rejections”: 0
        }
      },
      “DEFAULT_QUERY_GROUP”: {
        “total_completions”: 42572,
        “total_rejections”: 0,
        “total_cancellations”: 0,
        “cpu”: {
          “current_usage”: 0,
          “cancellations”: 0,
          “rejections”: 0
        },
        “memory”: {
          “current_usage”: 0,
          “cancellations”: 0,
          “rejections”: 0
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

### Response body fields 

| Field name | Description |
| :--- | :--- | 

> | `total_completions`  |  The total number of request completions in this `query_group` at the given node. This includes all shard-level and coordinator-level requests. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `total_completions`  |  The total number of request completions in the `query_group` at the given node. This includes all shard-level and coordinator-level requests. |
```

> | `total_rejections`    | The total number request rejections in this `query_group` at the given node. This includes all shard-level and coordinator-level requests.    |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `total_rejections`    | The total number request rejections in the `query_group` at the given node. This includes all shard-level and coordinator-level requests.    |
```

> | `total_cancellations` | The total number of cancellations in this `query_group` at the given node. This includes all shard-level and coordinator-level requests.  |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `total_cancellations` | The total number of cancellations in the `query_group` at the given node. This includes all shard-level and coordinator-level requests.  |
```

> | `cpu`   | The `cpu` resource type stats for the `query_group`  | 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `cpu`   | The `cpu` resource type statistics for the `query_group`.  | 
```

> | `memory`  | The `memory` resource type stats for the `query_group`  | 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `memory`  | The `memory` resource type statistics for the `query_group`.  | 
```

> ### Resource type stats

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Resource type statistics
```

| Field name  | Description   |
| :--- | :---- | 

> | `current_usage` |The resource usage for `query_group` at the given node based on the last run of the monitoring thread. This value is updated based on the `wlm.query_group.enforcement_interval`. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `current_usage` |The resource usage for the `query_group` at the given node based on the last run of the monitoring thread. This value is updated based on the `wlm.query_group.enforcement_interval`. |
```

> | `cancellations` | The cancellation count as a result of the cancellation threshold being reached.   |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `cancellations` | The number of cancellations resulting from the cancellation threshold being reached.   |
```

> | `rejections`    |  The rejection count as a result of the cancellation threshold being reached.   |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `rejections`    |  The number of rejections resulting from the cancellation threshold being reached.   |
```
